Hi, my name is Brian Caffo and
this is a lecture on Machine Learning.
So I'm gonna define machine
learning as a set of algorithms
that take a set of inputs and
return a prediction.
And I would classify the way in which it
returns a prediction at least in the two
ways that are most useful for
Data Science, as two broad categories.
And this is non exhaustive, there's other
aspect of machine learning, but the two I
wanna focus on are Unsupervised and
Supervised versions of machine learning.
In an Unsupervised case you're trying
to build a prediction where you don't
actually have the outcome
to train the algorithm.
So I would define unsupervised learning
as trying to uncover unobserved factors.
And some examples of this would
be clustering, mixture models and
principal components.
To give you an example I will go back to
one of the first examples of clustering.
And that is, for
the famous g factor is psychometrics.
So people like Spearmen,
a famous psychometrician and statistician,
used factor analysis to combine
collection of questionnaire data to find
that people who took these tests, these
psychometric tests, tended to cluster.
They hypothesized that these clusters
represented some outcome, some unmeasured
outcome that represents some kind
of intrinsic intellectual ability.
So this was one of the first
examples of unsupervised clustering
done well before the advent
of computers I might add.
If that's unsupervised clustering, let's
talk about what supervised learning is.
So supervised learning is using a
collection of predictors and some observed
outcomes to build an algorithm to predict
this outcome when it's not observed.
So some examples of supervised learning
algorithms include random forests,
boosting, support vector machines.
I'll try and give you a similarly old,
maybe in fact,
older version of supervised learning.
Regression.
And I give a picture of my regression book
which is free on Lean Pub which
you're more than welcome to download.
But the reason I actually put the book
up here is because of the picture
on the cover.
And I like this picture quite a bit
because it was taken from Francis Dalton's
original paper where he
developed regression.
In this paper he was trying
to predict the height
of sons from the height of the parents.
In some cases, some midpoint between
the father and the mother's height.
In other cases just from
the father's height.
But this is an example where we have
an observed outcome, the son's height, and
then we have the predictor,
the father's height and Francis Dalton
wanted to build up and algorithm.
So that,
when you just do the father's height and
say the mother was still pregnant.
Then you could try to predict
what the son's height was.
So, this led to the development of what
we think of low as linear regression.
However, modern prediction algorithms
can take tens of thousands
are potential predictors
to predict outcomes.
Now you need a lot of data to
train up your algorithm, but
that's been some of the real
advances in this area.
So in these cases,
you would use a collection of outcomes,
and lots of collection,
a large collection of predictors.
You would build up this algorithm.
And then you would then be
able to predict the outcome
in instances where you didn't have it.
So you might wanna predict
stock prices in the future.
But doing that, you're gonna
use historic stock pricing data
with a lot of predictors to try and
build up your algorithm.
Okay?
So that's machine learning in a nutshell.
I'd like to contrast it because
it seems very different.
Many people are familiar with
traditional statistics, but
they're maybe a little less
familiar with machine learning.
So I'd like to contrast traditional
statistics with machine learning.
So in my mind, traditional statistics or
machine learning, the main emphasis,
at least let's focus on
supervised learning.
It emphasizes predictions and
then it tries to evaluate performance
via the prediction performance.
So, unlike and
we'll talk a little bit about statistics,
traditional statistics,
how it evaluates performance.
So there's a lot of concern for
overfitting in machine learning, but
there's not as much concern for
model complexity.
So if you have a highly complex
model that's not overfitting, and
yielding good predictions, then there's
more of a tolerance for that in the field
of machine learning than there is in
the field of traditional statistics.
And so, there's an emphasis in
machine learning on performance.
And in less of an emphasis on
super population models and
generalizability that
occurs a lot in statistics.
So generalizability in machine
learning tends to be obtained
by applying the algorithm on novel data
sets where you know the outcome and
checking to see how good
your predictions are.
Rather than on a modeling and
sampling assumptions that often
occur in traditional statistics.
And there's of course in machine learning
a concern over performance and robustness.
So in traditional statistical analysis,
le's contrast that now, this tends
to emphasize not so much predictions,
even if it's doing predictions, but
emphasizes predictions or models as
they relate to some superpopulation.
You have a sample and you wanna
generalize it to some superpopulation
that the sample was drawn from.
So, there's less of an emphasis
on sampling from assumptions in
machine learning.
Traditional statistics tends to
focus on a-priori hypotheses,
where things like unsupervised learning
tend to try to generate the hypotheses.
Right?
The G factor generated this
idea that there was intrinsic
variability in intelligence.
It tends, Traditional Statistics tends to
focus on simpler models over complex ones,
and tends to put a higher penalty on
complexity than a machine learning
algorithm does.
In fact, the idea of a model seems already
simpler than the idea of an algorithm.
Right?
Just the words themselves they seem like
when I give you the word algorithm it
conjures up an image of that's far
more complex than the idea of a model,
the idea of a model is a simplified
version of something that's complicated.
So there's a lot of emphasis
on traditional statistics
on parameter interpretability.
And then an emphasis on the modeling and
assumptions that go in to connect your
data to the population you're
trying to draw inferences on.
And just like machine learning, there's
concern over assumptions and robustness.
So those are some broad distinctions
between machine learning and statistics,
though of course there's a lot of overlap.
Let's just give you some
examples of problems that occur
where you could both approach them
from a statistics perspective and
machine learning perspective and
talk about them.
One of the most famous, recent machine
learning exercises was the Netflix prize.
And here the goal was to predict
movie choices from a large
collection of instances
where users rated movies.
So you had the outcome data and you had
a lot of data on their viewing history and
other things that might help
you perform that prediction.
So machine learning would build
an automated movie recommender system.
And success would be defined as anything
that produces reliable predictions.
Statistical analysis on the other hand,
would try to build a parsimonious and
interpretable model to better understand
why people choose the movies that they do,
so you'd want something
that was interpretable.
You'd want to understand uh-huh, this is
the reason why this prediction works,
it's because of the psychology.
People have a tendency to like this kind
of movie if they like this kind of movie,
whereas an algorithm can tend to have
a lot more complexity built in and
may sacrifice some interpretability.
Another example that I was engaged
in was the Heritage Health Prize.
In the Heritage Health Prize,
we wanted to identify
the number of days that patients would
spend in the hospital in subsequent years.
Given their prior year's hospitalization
rates and a large collection
of their insurance claims data that
led to their hospitalization and
whatever other insurance claims they have.
And in this case if you are doing
a machine learning exercise,
which is how we approach the problem,
we wanted to build an automated system for
predicting hospital stays
from previous claims.
And all we want,
success is anything that yields
reliable predictions for the next year.
So when we predict for
a person in the next year, how long that
we think they're gonna be in the hospital.
If that's a number greater than zero,
we might want to do some
sort of intervention.
Statistical analysis, the goal would
be to build a parsimonious and
interpretal model to better understand
why people stay in the hospital longer.
So success would be anything true
that's learned about hospital stays,
whether or not it gives good predictions.
Okay, statistical analysis,you can have,
for example, a great example of
statistical effect that would yield no
significant prediction is, take for
example if a drug is shown to have
a very small but positive effect for
reducing the symptoms
of Alzheimer's disease.
That would be actually a huge success for
the medical field.
But knowledge of whether, but
the effect is very minor, but
statistically significant.
That would be a huge effect,
that would be a landmark study in
the field of Alzheimer's disease.
But if it was a really minor
effect knowledge of whether or
not someone was taking that drug
wouldn't lead to a good prediction of
they're Alzheimer's disease symptoms.
Okay?
That maybe something like their age and
other factors, their age and
their family history of Alzheimer's
disease and other things maybe a better
predictor of the severity, of the likely
severity of their disease than whether or
not they're taking this drug.
So that is an instance where statistical
significance in a statistical
model that's important may not lead to
an important, that important predictor
being something that would be important
in machine learning algorithms.
So I just wanna emphasize that there's
a big difference between these two
approaches even though
there's a lot of overlap.
And I think the biggest difference is just
in how you're thinking about the problem
and what you're concerned with.
The last example I'd like to
give is kind of a relatively
famous one which is Google Flu Trends.
In this, the very clever people at Google
tried to come up with a way to predict
flu cases based on
people's search history.
And try to predict outbreaks.
So in a particular area where
a lot of ISPs traffic is
relating to searches on Tamiflu that
might suggest an outbreak in that area.
So success for an algorithm in this case
would be anything that produces reliable
predictions.
And they had, for example the CDC data,
the historical CDC data to
build up the predictions to try and
predict flu outbreaks in the future.
I'm not so sure how this is held up but
nonetheless that's how you would approach
this as a machine learning algorithm.
This is a very clever idea I think.
Statistical analysis on the other hand,
would instead try to approach the problem
of trying to learn what
predicts flu outbreaks,
and anything true that was
learned about that would count.
Regardless of whether or
not it dramatically improved
our ability to predict.
So, the goal would be to build
a parsimonious and interpretal model to
better understand the outbreaks rather
than to just get prediction performance.
So if you build a model, if you built
a model that was simpler and led to better
understanding of what was going on but
didn't leave any good predictions,
that would be a beneficial
outcome in statistical analysis.
So some lessons learned are that both
approaches are extremely valuable and
they have their place.
And the amount of tolerable model and
algorithm complexity changes
dramatically between the approaches.
And their goals are often very different.
However, I would say this caveat
that there's a fair amount of work
in making machine learning
more interpretable.
And a fair amount of work can make things
traditional statistical approaches
have better prediction.
So it does seem like both fields
are working towards some common areas
in the middle.
In the next lecture,
I'm just gonna give you some examples of
further reading that you can go into for
contrasting traditional statistics
versus machine learning.
So, thank you for listening, and
I'll see you in the next lecture.